I always thought, isn't it strange, and nobody
ever talked about this in any biology class
that I've ever had, isn't it strange that the
animal that is the most regenerative, apparently
immortal, they don't age, cancer resistant, and by
the way, resistant to transgenes, so nobody still,
nobody's been able to make transgenic worms,
is also the one with the most chaotic genome.
And that's bizarre, you would think, but from
everything that we are told about genomes and
how they determine phenotypes, that the animal
with all those amazing properties should have
really pristine hardware. You would think that
you should have a really clean, really stable
genome if you're going to be regenerative, and
cancer resistant, and not age, and whatever,
it's the exact opposite. I always thought that
was incredibly weird. And so finally, I think,
and we've done some computational work now to
show why this is, I think we now understand
what's happening. What I think is happening is
this, imagine, let's go back to this issue of
developmental problem solving. So if you had a
passive material, such that you've got some genes,
the genes determine what the material
does, and so therefore you have an outcome,
and that outcome gets selected, you know, either
it does well or not, and then there's differential
reproduction. So the standard story of evolution.
Then everything works well, and everything works
like it would in a genetic algorithm. Very
simple. The problem with it, of course,
is that it takes forever. Because let's say
that you're a tadpole, and you have a mutation,
mutations usually do multiple things. Let's say
this mutation makes your mouth be off kilter,
but it also does something else somewhere else
in the tail, something positive somewhere in the
tail. Under the standard evolutionary paradigm,
you would never get to experience the positive
effects of that mutation, because with the mouth
being off, you would die, and that would be that.
So selection would weed you out very quickly,
and you would have to wait for a new mutation
that gives you the positive effects without the
bad effects on the mouth. So it's very hard to
make new changes without ripping up old gains
and so on. So that's some of the limitations
of that kind of view. But a much more realistic
scenario is the fact that you don't go straight
from a genotype to the phenotype. You don't go
from the genes to the actual body. There's this
layer of development in the middle, and the thing
about development is not just that it's complex,
it's that it's intelligent, meaning it has
problem-solving competencies. So what actually
happens in tadpoles is if I move the mouth off
to the side of the head, within a few weeks,
it comes back to normal on its own, meaning it
can reach again that region of anatomical space
where it wants to be. So imagine what this means
for evolution when you're evolving a competent
substrate, not a passive substrate. By the time
a nice tadpole goes up for selection to see
whether it gets to reproduce or not, evolution
can't really see whether it looks good because
the genome was great or because the genome was
actually so-so, but it fixed whatever issue it
had. So that competency starts to hide information
from selection. So selection finds it kind of hard
to choose the best genome because even the ones
with problems look pretty good by the time it's
time to be selected. So what happens, and we
did computational simulations of all this,
what happens is that when you do this, evolution
ends up spending all of its effort ramping up the
competency because it doesn't see the structural
genes. All it sees is the competency mechanism.
And if you improve the competency mechanism, well,
that makes it even harder to see the genome. And
so you have this ratchet, you have this positive
feedback loop where the more competent the
material is, the harder it is to evolve the actual
genome. All the pressure is now on the competency.
So you end up with kind of like a ladder, really
an intelligence ratchet. And people like Steve
Frank and others have pointed this out in other
aspects of biology and also in technology.
Once RAID array technology came up, it became not
as important to have really pristine and stable
disk media because the RAID takes care of it. So
the pressure on having really, really stable disk
is off. So what it means is that in the case
of the planaria, that positive feedback loop,
that ratchet went all the way to the end. That
basically what happened here is that what you've
got is an organism where it is assumed that your
hardware is crap. It's assumed that you're full
of mutations. All the cells have different numbers
of chromosomes. We already know the genetics are
all over the place. But all of the effort went
into developing an algorithm that can do the
necessary error correction and take that journey
in morphospace no matter what the hardware looks
like. That is why they don't age. That is why
they're resistant to cancer. And that's why nobody
can make a transgenic worm because they really
pay less attention to their genome in that sense
than many other organisms. So you can imagine
a sort of continuum. So you've got something
like C. elegans, the nematode, where they're
pretty cookie cutters. So as far as we know,
they don't regenerate much. What the genome
says is pretty much what you get. Then you've
got some mammals. So mammals, at least in the
embryonic stages, they've got some competency.
You can chop early mammalian embryos into pieces
and you get twins and triplets and so on. Then
you get salamanders. Salamanders are quite good
regenerators. They're quite resistant to cancer.
They are long lived. And then, you know, when
you run that spiral all the way to the end,
you get planaria, which are these amazing things
that have committed to the fact that the hardware
is going to be noisy and that all the effort is
going to go into an amazing algorithm that lets
them do their thing. And that's why if you're
going to make lines of weird planaria, targeting
the structural genome is not helpful. But if you
screw with the actual mechanisms that enable the
error correction, aka the bioelectricity, that's
when you can make lines of double-headed and so
on. Because now you're targeting the actual, you
know, the problem-solving machinery. If you were
to look at the genome of the salamander versus the
C. elegans, would the C. elegans be more chaotic
or more ordered than the salamander? It's a good
question. So nobody's done that specifically,
as far as I know. This is something that we're
just ramping up to do now, is to start... Because
correct me if I'm incorrect, it sounds like the
hypothesis is that if you have a large amount of
genetic chaos, or if you can quantify that, then
you would have something that would be compensated
for in terms of competency or some higher level
structure. Yeah, I think that's a prediction of
this model that I just laid out. And so, yeah, so
we can test that. I mean, a part of it also is,
there's an ecological component. I mean, you could
ask the question, so why doesn't everything end
up like planaria? And I think there's an aspect
of this that... That ratchet obviously doesn't
run to the end in every scenario, because
in some species there's a better trade-off
to be had somewhere else. I wonder if there
are three components then, because then,
if you don't see a direct correlation, it could
be hidden by a third factor. Yeah, which I think
would probably be environment. It would probably
be the ecology of how do you reproduce, you know,
how noisy, how dangerous, how unpredictable is
your environment. I'm going to guess there's
something like that involved here. Yeah, but I
think that's starting to kind of explain what's
going on with planaria. And that, yeah, so we
found the persistence of the two-headed phenotype,
and then Nestor Oviedo and Junji Murakuma
in my group wrote a nice paper on that,
and so on. And the next kind of big advance there
in 2017 was by Fallon Durant, a grad student in
my lab who also did something interesting. So when
you take a bunch of worms and you treat them with,
let's say, this reagent that blocks the gap
junctions, typically what you see is, okay,
you treat 100 worms, 70% of them go on to make two
heads, and 30% are unaffected. So we thought they
were unaffected because they stay one-headed, and
we always called them escapees because we thought
that they somehow just escaped the action of the
octanol. Maybe their skin was a little thicker or
something, and we never had a good explanation
for it. But anyway, you know, there was a 70%
penetrance to the phenotype, and most things have
not a 100% phenotype, so it wasn't— Penetrance?
Penetrance just means that when you apply some
treatment to a population, not all of them
have an effect and not all of them have the same
effect. That's true for pretty much every drug,
every mutation, and so on. So for years, we called
them escapees. And then around 2015, when Fallon
joined the lab, she recut some of those one-headed
escapees and found that they also do 70-30,
that 70% of them became double-headed and 30%
didn't. And so what we realized was that they're
not actually escapees. They're not unaffected.
They're affected. But the way they're affected is
quite different. They are randomized. They can't
tell if they should be one-headed or two-headed,
and they flip a coin with a 70-30 bias about what
they should do in any given generation. In fact,
we were able to show that when you cut
multiple pieces from the same worm—and
we call them cryptic worms, cryptic because
physically they look completely normal, one head,
one tail. They look normal, but they're not normal
because if you recut them, they're not sure what
to do. Their memories are bistable. So what
happens is that you can cut them into pieces, and
every piece makes its own decision if it's going
to be one-headed or two-headed, even though they
came from the same parent organism with the same
roughly 70-30 frequency. So that's another kind
of permanent line. And the way we studied it more
recently was as a kind of perceptual bistability.
So like the rabbit-duck illusion, right? You look
at it, and it looks like one thing, looks like
something else. That's kind of what's happening
here. There's a bioelectrical pattern that can
be interpreted in one of two ways, and that's
why they're confused. They're sort of bistable,
and they can fall in either direction. So that's
another thing we did in Planaria. If you enjoyed
this TOE-clipping, then the full video is
linked in the description. Don't forget to
follow Theories of Everything with Curt Jaimungal
on Spotify for exclusive content and in-depth
discussions. Your support on Spotify helps us grow
and to reach more curious minds like yours. Check
out the link in the description and join the Core
TOE community on Spotify today. See you there.